

A Pew Research study of 10,000 American adults found that people are more polarized today than ever before. As a result, conversations often turn into disputes, whereby participants, firmly entrenched in their views, are unwilling to listen or to consider other perspectives. Mobile technology – in particular, texting and on-screen communications – also has contributed to the demise of interpersonal conversational skills. Nevertheless, it is possible to have productive face-to-face dialogues with people who see the world differently than you do. The following 10 tips will help you become a better conversationalist:

    “It used to be that in order to have a polite conversation, we just had to follow the advice of Henry Higgins in My Fair Lady: ‘Stick to the weather and your health.’ But these days, with climate change and antivaxxing, those subjects aren’t safe either.”

    “A conversation requires a balance between talking and listening, and somewhere along the way, we lost that balance.”

    “Don’t multitask” – When talking with someone, give them your undivided attention. Be present in the moment.
    “Don’t pontificate” – A conversation is give-and-take; it’s not a lecture or a “promotional opportunity.” Be open to new viewpoints and opinions.
    “Use open-ended questions” – This interviewing technique encourages your conversational partners to consider and elaborate on their thoughts and feelings.
    “Go with the flow” – Follow the conversation and respond organically instead of focusing on being clever or thinking about what to say next.
    “If you don’t know, say that you don’t know” – Be wary of expounding on a topic as though you are an expert if you aren’t.
    “Don’t equate your experience with theirs” – Don’t use other people’s grief or misfortune as opportunities to unburden yourself or brag about your resilience. Empathize rather than trying to commandeer the moment.
    “Try not to repeat yourself” – Rehashing your ideas is boring and patronizing.
    “Stay out of the weeds” – Details you find interesting or necessary may simply bog down the conversation and bore the listener.
    “Listen” – If you’re not listening, you’re not engaging in a conversation. “You’re just two people shouting out barely related sentences in the same place.”
    “Be brief” – When you talk for too long or monopolize the conversation, you lose other people’s attention. 

    “You need to enter every conversation assuming that you have something to learn.”

When you’re interested in another person, you’ll want to hear what he or she has to say. Every person is unique and remarkable. If you participate in real, genuine conversations by speaking from the heart and listening with an open mind, others will surely amaze you.
